yes Oh God right okay yeah no no I'm
gonna get sacked
[Music]
South Africa the most southerly point of
the African continent to the west the
southern Atlantic into the east the
Indian Ocean a country home to over 57
million people but also some of the most
iconic species to have ever walked our
planet the Eastern Cape the second
largest province in South Africa once
dominated by farmland but now due to
conservation the wildlife is coming back
we've traveled to the karika Game
Reserve and over the next four episodes
accompanied by our guide Joe we will
look at some outstanding biology witness
some extraordinary behavior and get an
insight on some groundbreaking stories
of conservation in the wild lands of
South Africa to look for some a pose now
there's no way we'd be doing this in the
evening because that's when they'd be
coming out of the water as they're
mainly nocturnal they were coming out to
graze did you one of the largest land
mammals on earth hippos have incredible
size and strength and despite seeming
slow in the water they are remarkably
fast on land and can easily outrun a
human
say hey please can hold their breath
around seven minutes but they'll usually
resurface after around five and when
they're sleeping this is an automatic
process if they sink beneath the water
automatically their bodies raise
themselves up so they can breathing they
don't even have to come to land pretty
cool hippos have dense bones meaning
they can't float instead they propel
themselves around on surfaces beneath
the water but they also come to land to
feed hippos a scarce in the Eastern Cape
but in the Korea Game Reserve there are
two large rivers which maintain a
healthy population but coming to land
means coming into contact with humans
sometimes resulting in human wildlife
conflict hippos are thought to be one of
the deadliest large mammals in Africa
being responsible for an estimated 500
human deaths each year
here on the open plains a host of
animals enjoy a feast of lush vegetation
making large herbivores plentiful native
antelope species including Impala
blessbuck and Yala congregate in herds
as they graze on the finest shoots but
these animals must be wary as they
themselves can be a meal for one of the
savannas top predators the king of all
beasts the lion
[Music]
Lions in the Eastern Cape had become
completely exterminated by the 1850s due
to hunting practices but reintroduction
programs in the region have been hugely
successful the Lions here in Korea were
reintroduced to the reserve in 2004 and
are now thriving so we've just had a
glimpse of their massive canines but a
lion's pipe force is actually incredibly
weak compared to the likes of other big
cats and that's because most big cats
are known to be solitary with lions
being the only species to live in a
pride now a lone lion will attempt to
take down much smaller prey type but
when the pride needs feeding they'll
work together as a group to take down a
much larger animal sleeping between
roughly 18 to 20 hours a day as the air
becomes cooler they begin to awaken
gathering the pride for a potential hunt
Lions were mostly stalk medium sized
herbivores but have also been known to
attack elephants
this however is extremely rare but when
the pride works together the lion
certainly becomes one of Africa's
deadliest animals
[Music]
sadly it is estimated that only around
20,000 wild lions remain across Africa a
43 percent decline in just three
generations a stark reminder that we are
rapidly losing much of our biodiversity
[Music]
but thanks to conservation efforts one
wildcat species that is extinct in the
Eastern Cape will hopefully be making a
comeback
[Music]
now these animals don't chase their prey
like other predators instead they wait
and listen then pounce on their prey
delivering a fatal bite to the neck the
serval one of South Africa's most
elusive wild cats primarily nocturnal
and very rarely seen we have been
extremely lucky to be invited to take an
up-close and personal look at the Cougar
game reserves several breeding program
it is like opening the gate to Jurassic
Park servos can be unpredictable animals
and without Joe we wouldn't be able to
enter their enclosure
however Joe has been rearing the circles
with the aim of them being reintroduced
into the wild so we follow her lead
inside the thermal breeding program is
basically because in this area there
used to be circles and because of all
the farming happening in this area and
new towns popping up the serval
population has gone down quite a bit
we have tried before where you bring in
servals after a few months you release
them they just go back to where they
came from it could be a hundred
kilometres away or it could be five
hundred kilometres it's a homing
instinct like any other cat so what
we're thinking is if you breed them yeah
the kittens which is their home so this
is where they'll stay really there's a
lot of different theories that we have
to try something
in the wild servals are remarkable
predators hunting anything from insects
and mice to reptiles and birds their
power is held in their stocky back legs
which they used to launch themselves up
to 3 metres into the air swiping prey
out of the sky on the ground they use
their acute hearing to locate prey
before pouncing and on the African
plains smaller prey types are no match
for the serval and hopefully these cats
will one day be back in the wild on the
open savannas where they belong now of
course in the world we could never get
this close to servals and it's a real
privilege to be in here this close to
them with Joe and these breeding
programs are so important at
re-establishing populations back into
their natural range and they really are
feisty little predators next time on
wild land South Africa we take a look at
some of the more peculiar species which
roam the African plains and subscribe to
BBC Earth for more fascinating wildlife
videos from around the world
[Music]
[Applause]